From theheronsnest@cablespeed.com Wed Feb  4 18:24:37 2004
From: Christopher Herold <theheronsnest@cablespeed.com>
To: Paul David Mena <paul@haikupoet.com>, Ferris Gilli <treefrog@cfl.rr.com>,
     Paul MacNeil <theheronsnest@yahoo.com>,
     peggy lyles <turtlerock@worldnet.att.net>,
     Paul MacNeil <pwm.shippond@worldnet.att.net>
Date: Tue, 03 Feb 2004 15:03:37 -0700
Subject: THN - The Whole Kit 'n' Kaboodle!

Dear Ones!

Here is the Valentine Awards issue. Changes can still be made through
Friday.

Enjoy! Proof! Pooof!

Punchy

******

THE FIFTH ANNUAL VALENTINE AWARDS

OVERVIEW


I^Òd like to begin by restating what I^Òve said in previous years, that
there are three major purposes for our annual Valentine Awards. The
first is to honor poets who have gifted our readers with exceptionally
powerful work. The images, moods, and emotions in their haiku continue
to resonate long after we^Òve read them. The second purpose is to provide
you an opportunity to help shape the evolution of haiku beyond your
individual publishing efforts. Poems voted to be favorites serve as
guiding lights for poets and editors alike. Haiku included in the
Valentine Awards issue exemplify qualities that are generally held by
our readers to be most effective. The third purpose goes along with the
second. A thorough review of a given volume of The Heron^Òs Nest (with
the intention of voting for favorite haiku) produces valuable insights
about which techniques work and which do not.

All year long we receive poems from around the world. We^Òve probably
read close to 13,000 poems during 2003, but seriously consider only
about one in twenty (5%). Of those 3,000 or so true contenders, we
accepted about one in five (20%). Of the 636 poems in Volume V, 343
(54%) received at least one vote to be a top-ten favorite of the year.
These figures are meant to illustrate a point. We feel that all poems
that have been accepted into The Heron^Òs Nest are worthy of praise.

The editors chose 36 poems (3 per month) to be Editors^Ò Choices. That^Òs
only one quarter of one percent of the approximately 13,000 poems
submitted to us. Of those 36, the twelve Heron^Òs Nest Award poems
constitute one tenth of one percent of all poems submitted. Amazing
odds!

We now come to the Valentine Awards. What a great affirmation it is when
readers and editors agree that certain poems stand out from all the
rest! We are delighted to tell you that, of the twelve Heron^Òs Nest
Award winners this year, eleven of them placed in the top twelve voted
to be favorites.

Far more voters turned out for the fifth annual Valentine Awards than
ever before. We thank all of you who took the time to select your
favorite poems. Choosing only ten from 636 is a difficult challenge.
Happily it is also a richly rewarding process. Along with poems
selected, many of you sent along comments about your experiences of
voting. We very much appreciate such responses and have decided to share
some of them (with permission, of course) with all of our readers.
You^Òll find these ^ÓNotes from Voters^Ô on the insides of the cover.

We value the contributions of everyone who has appeared in The Heron^Òs
Nest and thoroughly enjoy corresponding with you, encouraging you, and
learning from you. You have shared with us a wealth of deeply resonant
moments, expressed with great skill. We thank you for giving us the
opportunity to share your haiku with the world. Those of you who appear
in the Valentine Awards issue have achieved something extra special. It
is our great pleasure to honor you.

Christopher Herold

*****************

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POET OF THE YEAR

John Stevenson

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your verdict and your service. John
Stevenson is a habitual writer of fine haiku. Evidence is abundant: John
sends poems to his Heron^Òs Nest editor every month (hasn^Òt missed for
years); he habitually carries small dime-store notebooks; he is seen to
sketch or write haiku daily; and he will probably admit to even thinking
in haiku. After a ginko with John, in the form of a mountain climb, Yu
Chang wrote this haiku for a group of friends [quoted with permission]:

lichened pine
my poet friend asks
for a pencil

However, mere frequency or volume of composition is no guarantee of
haiku success. Stevenson possesses both a wordsmith^Òs skill and a poet^Òs
eye for the natural world. He knows the alga and fungus of lichen as
indeed he knows the pine. Even if some of John^Òs poems might look
irregular, reading them aloud reveals purposeful emphasis of a word or a
line break. His chosen words are the right ones and they appear in the
right places.

John is able to see himself in the larger world and appears in the first
person without pointing an egoistic finger at himself. There^Òs an
awareness of the poet^Òs place; it is not a central place.

autumn wind
the leaves are going
where I'm going

moths on the door
I close
and lock

snowy night
sometimes you can't be
quiet enough

Much of his work shows awareness of season and utilizes an intuitive
juxtaposition.

a few leaves
left on the tree
we have our talk

hope
without knowing what for
autumn colors

trial separation
ice distends
the rain gutters

walking home from church
sun on the other side
of my face

Mother^Òs Day
that first breath of air
outside the door

Not to forget another hallmark of John^Òs poetic voice, here are examples
of a certain bemused twinkle of irony:

signs of spring
the expiration date
on fat-free milk

May sun
I^Òm the one
the puppy comes to

For the second year in a row, John Stevenson was judged ^ÓPoet Of The
Year^Ô by his peers, the readers and poets of The Heron^Òs Nest. There is
obvious agreement among the Editors and with these Nesters. This past
year, we published 17 of his haiku, and 15 were supported by the voters.
Bravo to John! He is successful by both measures. It is my special
pleasure to congratulate such an excellent haiku poet as John Stevenson.

Paul MacNeil

***********

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POET OF THE YEAR
FIRST RUNNER-UP

Connie Donleycott

Connie Donleycott has a way with words. Her haiku, while instantly
understood by the reader, nonetheless illuminate their subjects in fresh
and often pleasantly surprising ways:

finding a way
through the forest
winter sunlight

The first two lines of this haiku might suggest a lost hiker or an
adventurer. The final line completes the poem in an unexpected way,
revealing that it is the sunlight^×and not a person^×that has navigated
the forest. The result is not just a description from nature but rather
the celebration of a completed journey.

Connie frequently begins with a scene from nature. Then, like a camera,
her words focus in on an object with a human connection, allowing the
reader to share in her discovery.

blowing rain . . .
colors blend
on a garden pinwheel

summer garden
the full stretch
of the hose

Sometimes nature encounters humanity directly, often with delightful
results:
beachcomber
grains of sand fill
her smile lines

As I revisit Connie^Òs haiku from Volume V, my smile lines deepen as
well.

Paul David Mena

**************

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POET OF THE YEAR
SECOND RUNNER-UP

vincent tripi

vincent tripi is one of those special individuals who breathes new life
into the haiku genre. He often does so by presenting common subjects
from uncommon perspectives. Sometimes this is startling:

her only nipple
begins to harden
a new year

Deathbed . . .
       my old friend^Òs imitation
                of a firefly

The connections between people, or between people and nature are often
central to tripi^Òs haiku. He is a master of ^Óshow don^Òt tell,^Ô ever
nudging us toward a deeper, more universal understanding of the
experience described. A good example is ^Ósmall town^× / the smell of /
everyone^Òs wood.^Ô On the surface, the olfactory image is plain enough,
and easily accessible. Without digging far, however,  one uncovers an
intriguing paradox: we are at once independent and interdependent. With
a casual whiff, the scent of woodsmoke may seem homogeneous, but tripi
is sensitive, a haiku poet. He detects at least one particular variety
of wood and intuits a multitude of fires. The smoke from each rises and
mingles with smoke from the others. One more step returns him to the
recognition of a unified whole. The small size of the town is meaningful
here. Most of the inhabitants know and interact with one another, just
as the various odors of smoke rise and mingle. tripi^Òs haiku are not
without humor. In this poem he pokes fun, subtly, at another side of the
same fact: in small towns everyone knows what everyone else is doing.
Sometimes his humor is right up front, as in one of my favorites:

a foot of snow^×
the cat out loving and
where is the garden Buddha?

Superficially, this is hilarious^×the thought of a cat^Òs kinky romancing
of a stone Buddha. Even so, as with most of tripi^Òs work, there are
profound levels. The garden Buddha (just a representation of the
historical figure) is transcended, literally and figuratively, by snow.
A great leveler of playing fields, the snow covers everything, leading
us to realize that there is ^Ónowhere to spit and not hit Buddha!^Ô

vince tripi^Òs work is exciting, provocative, and rewarding. I^Òm
delighted that readers have voted accordingly.

Christopher Herold

*****************

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POET OF THE YEAR
THIRD RUNNER-UP

Allen McGill

Allen McGill lives in Mexico. The Heron^Òs Nest first published his work
in December 2002, and he has contributed regularly to our journal ever
since. It has been my great pleasure to serve as his editor.

This year Allen^Òs fellow readers and writers awarded him the fourth
highest number of votes overall. He won the Heron^Òs Nest Award in July
2003, with a poem whose beauty and level of  insight continue to garner
praise from readers. Of his ten poems that appeared in Volume V, ^Óstorm
clouds^Ô received the most points:

storm clouds
the valley darkens
farm by farm

Allen^Òs haiku demonstrate his respect for the natural world and his
affinity for its creatures. Many feature animals, usually combined with
some aspect of humanity. Skillfully balancing humankind and nature,
Allen juxtaposes vivid images to create memorable, multilayered haiku.
His work is rich with sensory appeal that draws readers into the
writer^Òs experience.

a gull slips
on the polished handrail
rolling thunder

sunglare
the rasp as my clam rake
uncovers tin cans

evening rain
the deaf dog sleeps
with a paw on my foot

Allen^Òs haiku come from the real world, from life. When he includes
himself, he is careful not to let the poet get in the way of the poem.

Ferris Gilli

*********

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR

creak of the swing . . .
my feet still reach
the sky

Connie Donleycott

>From the first reading many months ago, Connie Donleycott^Òs ^Ócreak of
the swing^Ô has nourished my spirit. It becomes increasingly expansive
and satisfying over time, holding true and inviting new layers of
association.

The long ^Óe^Ô sounds creak their way to what is surely a clear spring
sky. Subliminally the sound suggests bones that have known the rigors of
a good number of winters. That is all the more reason for exuberance as
the swing rises and youthful pleasure returns. The long ^Ói^Ô rhyme of
^Ómy^Ô and ^Ósky^Ô melds self and infinite space, personalizing the
limitless possibilities the haiku celebrates.

Maybe the poem harks back to earliest childhood when a loving parent
pushed the swing and encouraged Connie to see her feet ^Óreach the sky.^Ô
Maybe she formed the phrase later on when she could control the motion
herself, pushing against the ground and then lifting her legs to arc
higher as she gained strength and skill, experiencing the wonder of the
universe and of her own achievement. Maybe language has only recently
joined the sensation, bringing with it the symbolism of joyful capacity
and continuing potential. Whatever their origin, the words are just
right.

As a rule of thumb,  first-person pronouns in haiku require great skill.
They can overemphasize the ego or close readers out of the experience
described. On both counts the opposite is true here. Gentle humor
infuses the poem, exposing and universalizing the self-test. Success and
delight bring the reader right in, first with a cheer of ^ÓGo, Connie!^Ô
and then with a compulsion to swing along.

The firm push rocks some paradigms. Certainly, well-grounded people (and
poems) deserve admiration. That a person has his ^Ófeet on the ground^Ô
communicates his good sense and reliability. I can't fault the wisdom of
well-wishers who, from time to time, advise me to get my head out of the
clouds and come down to earth and realistic expectations. No one ever
told me to get my feet out of the sky, though! Relishing the image of
Connie's up there, I enjoy a broad grin, once more becoming an observer
and then a participant in the 2003 Poem of the Year. I commend the
voters  who selected it and invite all readers to return to it again and
again.

Peggy Willis Lyles

***************

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR
FIRST RUNNER-UP

Deathbed . . .
     my old friend^Òs imitation
               of a firefly

vincent tripi

The effectiveness of this wonderful haiku begins with the starkness and
immediacy of the raw emotion it evokes^×the imminent death of an old
friend. vincent tripi^Òs use of the single word ^Ódeathbed^Ô demands the
reader^Òs attention and reflection, capturing the most basic human
frailty and leaving us to contemplate all of its implications.

We are not left in this state for long, however. The haiku strengthens
and deepens by providing a simple but vivid reminder of the brevity of
life. This reminder comes in the form of a firefly, whose care-free
floating through summer breezes belies its short lifespan. How very much
like our own experience this is^×a balmy night of flutter and flash,
seemingly timeless, but over much too soon.

It is this very analogy that completes the haiku, the realization that
our own existence, so full of cares and worries, is nonetheless
fleeting, and in that sense is not at all unlike that of a firefly.

vincent tripi^Òs use of the word ^Óimitation^Ô is intriguing in that the
dying friend is most likely not trying to consciously mimic a firefly.
Instead, this imitation occurred in the mind of the author, who, in
gazing at his friend, drifted back to a moment long ago, a seemingly
endless summer night. Like the flashing of a firefly, however, this
moment, too is short-lived, leaving only the resonating words of this
sad and lovely haiku.

Paul David Mena

**************

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR
SECOND RUNNER-UP

storm clouds
the valley darkens
farm by farm

Allen McGill

It has been claimed that many of the stones in walls built by the Incas
were made to fit so perfectly that it is impossible to wedge a razor
blade between them. The same could be said about the words of this
haiku. Allen McGill could not have expressed his experience more simply
or more effectively. The surface images are perfectly clear and yet
there is ample room for readers to delve deeper. The juxtaposition of
storm clouds to farms gives rise to several interesting associative
meanings. In his July commentary, Paul David Mena pointed to a few of
those associations. There may well be others; it is  up to us to find
our own.

Impending disaster is implied by those heavy clouds. Soon there could be
flooding, loss of crops, loss of buildings, even loss of life. The
foreboding is tangible and this feeling can be projected to include
other current events as well: political, martial, economic, or domestic.

There is something more basic to this poem, however, than sharp imagery
and a variety of meanings. I am first and foremost struck by its
emotional intensity, its quality of ominousness. The storm has not yet
struck. The shadows of massive, cumulo-nimbus clouds are gliding into
the valley. There^Òs no time to waste. The livestock must be gathered,
pets brought inside, windows shuttered, and doors secured.

Editors and readers alike agree that this is a haiku of remarkable
power.

Christopher Herold

****************

READERS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR
THIRD RUNNER-UP

snowy night
sometimes you can^Òt be
quiet enough

John Stevenson

It^Òs nearly midnight. My wife and I are in bed reading our books. All at
once, something about the silence causes me to turn to look at her.
Eyelids drooping, she^Òs falling asleep.

In the morning, I^Òm the first one to the meditation room. I  settle on
my cushion and wait. It seems I^Òll be sitting alone today so, at the
appointed time, I ring the bell. A minute or two later the door opens.
Someone crosses the room and sits down. Then it^Òs quiet again, but
there^Òs a distinct change in the nature of the silence.

I^Òm sure you^Òve been in a large hall filled with people who are not
speaking, a candlelight vigil maybe, or perhaps outside, for a funeral
committal, or a moment of silence at a ball game. Imagine how different
those silences are. How many qualities of silence are there?

Night has fallen and the surrounding world is slowing down, drawing
inward. Snow begins to fall . . . Can you feel the change, even in the
silence itself? Yes! As it accumulates, snow becomes a muffler,
softening and calming the rough-edged world. It was at such a time John
Stevenson was moved to stop what he was doing to listen. When he resumed
his activities, even the smallest sounds appeared harsh in contrast to
the deepening drift of silence. John is a natural-born poet, a haiku
poet. It would be impossible for him not to seek words to express
wonderment at such a subtle but perceptible change. John did find the
words and we would be hard pressed to find others that come close to
matching the way he conveys this special experience. The syntax is not
typical of haiku. The tone, so casual that it almost comes across as an
after-thought, a scribbled a note, is quite a contrast to the moment of
awe described. That this is so illustrates the great skill with which
John Stevenson writes. His down-to-earth use of language puts us at ease
and welcomes us to share his experiences. And now, I myself am moved to
a respectful silence.

Christopher Herold

****************

EDITORS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR

slave cemetery
the tug of the current
on willow fronds

Carolyn Hall


Moving with the deep, subtle power of a river current, Carolyn Hall^Òs
poem pulls at my emotions. It stirs a strong memory of my childhood. One
freezing day, I sat with my young cousin at a scrubbed, white deal table
in a kitchen that was filled with a wood stove^Òs heat and the energy of
bustling women. We listened while a woman named Sing described how she
was taught to cook by her grandmother, who told Sing stories of her life
as a slave. Years later, I heard the unforgettable voice of The Reverend
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., speaking his immortal words: ^Ó. . . I have
a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former
slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down at
the table of brotherhood.^Ô

It is often difficult to delineate boundaries of centuries-old burial
grounds without expensive archaeological surveys. Great numbers of slave
cemeteries that lie concealed under tangles of weeds and debris may
never be found. Lost to the unremitting forces of progress, others lie
under concrete and steel. Only a few eighteenth and nineteenth century
maps show the locations of slave burial grounds, and on these few, the
plots are not clearly defined, with no roads leading directly to them.
Unwilling to give up tillable land, most slave owners chose burial
grounds in marginal areas not suitable for agriculture, such as low,
swampy places subject to flooding. Lacking stone markers and monuments,
mourners adorned the graves with wildflowers or small trees and
sometimes placed wooden markers. On the Sea Islands and along the South
Atlantic coast, relatives and friends of dead slaves sometimes covered
the individual burial mounds with oyster shells^×the same kind of shells
that are used in building tabby houses.

Cemeteries represent the foundation of African-American history. Some
that are still used today have survived the passage of time in the care
of descendents of slaves. Families exist who have buried their dead in
the same cemetery for close to 200 years, beginning with their ancestors
who were brought in chains to work the surrounding land.  Wherever the
site of Carolyn^Òs haiku, it is a unique historical resource.

With delicate skill and sensitivity, Carolyn creates resonance through
powerful juxtaposition and symbolism. She places a beautiful scene that
traditionally evokes a gentle mood and connotations of pleasant,
warm-weather activities beside an image that has associations of the
most base acts of human cruelty. As Paul MacNeil wrote in his essay for
this poem (THN Award Vol. V:06), ^ÓThe slave times are past, yet the
river, the land, and the poet remain.^Ô

But those times still reverberate; the river still flows, tugging,
sometimes uprooting whatever is in its path; the land is forever
changing; the poet does not stand unmoved.  I sense the poem itself as
metaphor. The era of human bondage is over, but descendents of its
perpetrators, victims, and fierce abolitionists continue to struggle for
balance in its aftermath.

Ferris Gilli

*********

EDITORS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR
FIRST RUNNER-UP

faint stars . . .
the cabby speaks
of home

Timothy Hawkes

Distances and empathy snap together in a moment of profound human
connection and insight. Timothy Hawkes successfully captures the
experience in a few simple words that involve the reader, expanding the
links and inviting a wealth of personal associations. We discover
something we knew already and respond with the classic ^Óah^Ô as a
deeply-felt and touching haiku takes its place among the finest of the
genre.

The first line fixes the poem in a vast and often uncertain universe.
Stars are markers shared by all human beings, constants amid ongoing
change. Weather, smog, or city lights make them seem faint on this
particular night, subtly augmenting the anonymity and potential
loneliness of urban life.

The cabdriver and his paying passenger share a relationship that is both
distant and, temporarily, intimate. Theirs is a chance and utilitarian
meeting. They probably will never see each other again. When the cabby
speaks of home, he is likely to describe a place an ocean and many land
miles away, surrounded by terrain and culture very different from those
the listener would associate with the word. Connotations outweigh
denotations, though, and ^Óhome^Ô as a concept is almost universally
understood. So are the complex emotions associated with separation from
that special place of origin and identity.

Briefly, in a cab going from one place to another under faint stars, two
human beings confront a commonality that supercedes their differences.
The everyday reality of the encounter makes the epiphany all the more
memorable and evocative. Omar from Egypt is the driver I think of. Other
readers will supply specific details that bond them to the slice of life
Hawkes has so adroitly sketched. One way or another, we feel a little
closer to fellow travelers on this small planet that is our home.

Peggy Willis Lyles

***************

EDITORS^Ò CHOICE

POEM OF THE YEAR
SECOND RUNNER-UP

summer garden
the full stretch
of the hose

Connie Donleycott

This haiku won the October Heron^Òs Nest Award. In the accompanying
essay, Peggy Willis Lyles wrote of simplicity and the poem^Òs consonance
with haiku philosophy.

The poem^Òs subject is water and getting it to a garden in summer. Yet,
the writer doesn^Òt use the word ^Ówater,^Ô and the poem has no verbs.
Connie Donleycott presents the action and key subjects with laudable
skill. Most of the words recede in prominence, nearly disappearing,
except perhaps the keyword ^Óstretch.^Ô Saying it aloud is elongation
itself. The sound and meaning of the noun blend together provoking, as
Peggy wrote, a kinesthetic response. The touch and smell of the vinyl
(or rubber) and the feel of the water pulsing through it take me right
to Connie^Òs spot in a garden^×one from my own memory. The hose is
threaded to an outside spigot just a bit too far from my garden. Of
course, I could buy a longer hose, but who knew how much I^Òd plant this
year? It is heavyand I have hauled the full hose to its natural length,
and tug for a few more inches to get water to the outlying plants. I see
the spray sparkling as it breaks after an upward angle and drops to the
ground. I have my thumb over the end of the hose, tightening my grip to
get the best distance. I learned this skill as a child, no doubt dashing
around trying to soak my brother. Yet as a gardener I hold the pose for
a long, purposeful time. Fatigued, I switch to the other thumb.

Daily chores. There is an obligation, a bond, between the gardener and
the gardened. Raising vegetables or flowers is work, but ideally, it is
a creative, often solitary pleasure. Irrigation, which the haiku
implies, is the giving of life. The hobbyist works the soil, starts and
maintains the growth of the plants, and is rewarded aesthetically and
materially. Great satisfaction comes with the harvest for vase or dining
table. Such a simple and effortlessly accessible poem, full of so much
imagery, is a gift from Connie to readers and lovers of haiku.

Paul MacNeil

**********

SPECIAL MENTIONS

Several poems scored well above the average, and a few poets accumulated
high overall point scores for their respective bodies of work. Although
they didn^Òt receive awards, it is clear that these poems and poets have
made lasting impressions and richly deserve to be honored by inclusion
in this Valentine Awards issue.

New Year^Òs Eve bath^×
I fail to become
a swan
Fay Aoyagi

Hokusai^Òs Wave
a child shapes his fingers
into claws
Pamela Miller Ness

spring morning
the raven goes
where the wind went
Elizabeth Searle Lamb

tai chi
with my wife
morning glories open
Randy M. Brooks

there must be light
where they came from^×
chestnut blossoms
Gabriel Rosenstock

spring scents
my dog and I walk
through different worlds
Kirsty Karkow

my father^Òs globe
so many countries
with wrong names
Gary Warner

animal skull
the child fingers
her eye
Tom Painting

gaunt children
selling old bayonets^×
noonday sun
Kylan Jones-Huffman

a field of crickets . . .
stepping in the spaces
between their songs
Stephen Amor

bird house empty of seed
even the jays
look for Bernard
Francine Porad

single living
I allow the kettle
a full whistle
Carmen Sterba

twilight
a child^Òs pail taken
by the tide
Cherie Hunter Day

village square^×
old faces borrowing angles
from the stone
H. F. Noyes

the nail sinking in^×
my father^Òs hammer
in my hand
Gary Hotham

when did I stop
being young?
Katherine Cudney

the corner
where nothing grows^×
moonlight
Brian Gierat

autumn chill^×
a butterfly swept up
with the leaves
Cindy Zackowitz

open hospice door
a path of moonlight
across the sea
William Cullen, Jr.

headstone
a dash
between the years
Francis Masat

ice moon^×
the cat grooms away
my touch
Linda Jeannette Ward

stone garden^×
this morning the islands
float on snow
Kuniharu Shimizu

***************


