winter stars
who else sits up
with a sick child?
Joann Klontz

No season evokes such a profound sense of austerity and loneliness as Winter.  
And no life event exacerbates one's sense of "me-against-the-world" as much 
as a sick child.

Think about it: all of the trees are bare and trembling in the winter breeze.  
What was once a lush, green lawn is now a gray-white tarp of hardened snow.  
The vibrant streetlife of the city has retreated to gas-powered fireplaces 
and cable television reruns.  Life has become an indoor sport.

When a child becomes sick, however, the sporting life is tagged out at home 
plate.  Parents run out of arms and legs very quickly.  Forget the marathon 
you ran three years ago - can you pace the length of a two bedroom apartment 
for six hours straight?  I think of this line from one of my favorite poems - 
"Marriage", by Gregory Corso: "I am sleepless, worn, up for nights, head 
bowed against a quiet window, the past behind me, finding myself in the most 
common of situations a trembling man".  Yes, this is a common situation, but 
who is sharing it with me - at this, my darkest hour?

When a haiku poet is devoid of inspiration, he or she needs only to look to 
the sky.  Whether the moon waxes or wanes, shooting stars traverse the sky, 
or clouds render the heavens a featureless expanse of utter nothingness, it 
is often our only consistent Muse.  Winter stars are all the more poignant in 
their contrast with the dark winter sky, a contrast that heightens with each 
sleepless hour.

Joann Klontz has looked to the winter stars for both inspiration and solace.  
They cannot cradle a crying child or soothe a feverish face, but they offer 
an image of constancy in a world that seems to be spiraling out of control.
When no one else shows up for the midnight watch, the winter stars stand
silent vigil with those who long for daylight.
